---
layout: post
title:  "The de Bruijn criterion vs the LCF approach"
usemathjax: true 
tags: general, Milner, de Bruijn, LCF
---

The main objective of formalising mathematics is to ensure its correctness. 
We have [previously considered]({% post_url 2021-10-27-formalisms %}) the relationship between logical formalisms and mathematical reasoning.
Given the prevalence of errors in computer programs, how can we guarantee that our proof assistants are correct?
Two separate approaches are the *de Bruijn criterion* and the *LCF approach*.

### The de Bruijn criterion

The de Bruijn criterion involves storing the formal proof in full so that it can be checked later by an independent program, eliminating any need for trust:

> A verifying program only needs to see whether in the putative proof the small number of logical rules are always observed. Although the proof may have the size of several Megabytes, the verifying program can be small. ... If someone does not believe the statement that a proof has been veriﬁed, one can do independent checking by a trusted proof-checking program. ... A Mathematical Assistant satisfying the possibility of independent checking by a small program is said to satisfy the de Bruijn criterion. (page 2362)

Henk Barendregt and Freek Wiedijk.
The challenge of computer mathematics.
*Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A* (2005) 363, 2351–2375

### The LCF approach

> the size of proofs was limited by available memory

> had the idea that instead of saving whole proofs, the system should just remember the results of proofs, namely theorems. The steps of a proof would be performed but not recorded, like a mathematics lecturer using a small blackboard who rubs out earlier parts of proofs to make space for later ones. To ensure that theorems could only be created by proof, Milner had the brilliant idea of using an abstract data type whose predeﬁned values were instances of axioms and whose operations were inference rules. Strict typechecking then ensured that the only values that could be created were those that could be obtained from axioms by applying a sequence of inference rules – namely theorems. (page 170)

Michael Gordon.
From LCF to HOL: a short history.
*In*: G. Plotkin (editor).
*Proof, Language, and Interaction: Essays in Honour of Robin Milner* 169–185.
 