_drafts/2022-04-06-ZFC_in_HOL.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "Adding Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory to higher-order logic"
usemathjax: true 
tags: set theory, ZFC_in_HOL, ZFC, Isabelle/ZF
---

Many researchers, frustrated with the limited expressiveness of higher-order logic vis-à-vis Zermelo Frankel [set theory](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/set-theory/), have sought somehow to combine the two.
The difficulty is to make the combination seamless, yielding a unified formal theory: not two theories bolted together.
We don't want to keep transferring facts, constructions and proofs from one theory to the other.

### Gordon's HOL-ST

Higher-order logic was popularised by the late, great Mike Gordon ([bio](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsbm.2018.0019), also [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04002)),
and it was he who first tried to extend it with ZFC.
His [HOL-ST](https://rdcu.be/cJhwy) simply introduced a type
$V$ of all sets and a relation ${\in} : V\times V \to bool$, then asserted formulations of all the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms.
He remarks

> The resulting theory has a consistency strength stronger than ZF, because one can define inside it a semantic function from a concrete type representing first order formulae to $V$ such that all the theorems of ZF can be proved. However, a model for higher order logic plus V can be constructed in ZF with one inaccessible cardinal. Thus the strength of higher order logic augmented with ZF-like axioms for $V$ is somewhere between ZF and ZF plus one inaccessible cardinal.

He credits these claims to the legendary [Ken Kunen](https://hilbert.math.wisc.edu/node/829).


XXXX

[previous post]({% post_url 2022-01-26-Set_theory %}) 

ZF set theory turns out to be surprisingly close in strength to the calculus of inductive constructions (CIC), the type theory implemented by Coq and Lean.

Isabelle has supported first-order logic and set theory as early as the 1990s. Isabelle/ZF is a separate instance

Commit message:

A bit more on the set theory post for April 6, and hoping to prompt Github into displaying today's post

_drafts/2022-04-06-ZFC_in_HOL.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "Adding Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory to higher-order logic"
usemathjax: true 
tags: set theory, ZFC_in_HOL, ZFC, Isabelle/ZF
---

Many researchers, frustrated with the limited expressiveness of higher-order logic vis-à-vis Zermelo Frankel [set theory](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/set-theory/), have sought somehow to combine the two.
The difficulty is to make the combination seamless, yielding a unified formal theory: not two theories bolted together.
We don't want to keep transferring facts, constructions and proofs from one theory to the other.

### Gordon's HOL-ST

Higher-order logic was popularised by the late, great Mike Gordon ([bio](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsbm.2018.0019), also [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04002)),
and it was he who first tried to extend it with ZFC.
His [HOL-ST](https://rdcu.be/cJhwy) simply introduced a type
$V$ of all sets and a relation ${\in} : V\times V \to bool$, then asserted formulations of all the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms.
He remarks

> The resulting theory has a consistency strength stronger than ZF, because one can define inside it a semantic function from a concrete type representing first order formulae to $V$ such that all the theorems of ZF can be proved. However, a model for higher order logic plus V can be constructed in ZF with one inaccessible cardinal. Thus the strength of higher order logic augmented with ZF-like axioms for $V$ is somewhere between ZF and ZF plus one inaccessible cardinal.

He credits these claims to the equally legendary [Ken Kunen](https://hilbert.math.wisc.edu/node/829).
As a demonstration of the system's power, Sten Agerholm formalised Dana Scott's inverse limit construction of the set $D_\infty$, satisfying


$$
\begin{align*}
 D_\infty \cong [D_\infty\to D_\infty]
\end{align*}
$$

and yielding a model of the untyped $\lambda$-calculus.
Gordon also describes a construction of the list datatype using set theory. However, this experiment was not continued, with little attempt to integrate the set theory and higher-order logic worlds.

### Oboa's HOLZF

About 10 years later, Steven Obua performed a similar experiment with Isabelle/HOL. [His paper](https://rdcu.be/cJDx2) on that work begins with some amusing remarks:

> The actual viability and how-to of the approach was brought to the attention of the author by Bob Solovay who outlined HOLZF on the Isabelle mailing list and claimed that “for certain reasons he needed such a monster”, opposing Larry Paulson’s remark that HOLZF might be “too much of a good thing”. Bob Solovay also provided a proof of the consistency of HOLZF relative to the consistency of ZFC + ’there is an inaccessible cardinal’.


 
XXXX

[previous post]({% post_url 2022-01-26-Set_theory %}) 

ZF set theory turns out to be surprisingly close in strength to the calculus of inductive constructions (CIC), the type theory implemented by Coq and Lean.

Isabelle has supported first-order logic and set theory as early as the 1990s. Isabelle/ZF is a separate instance
