_drafts/2022-11-30-CTT_in_Isabelle-II.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "Martin-Löf type theory in Isabelle, II"
usemathjax: true
tags: [Martin-Löf type theory, Isabelle, examples]
---

The [previous post]({% post_url 2022-11-23-CTT_in_Isabelle %})
describes the implementation of Martin-Löf type theory in Isabelle.
The ability to enter the rules in a notation as close as possible
to the original papers and use them immediately for proofs was one of my key objectives
for Isabelle in the 1980s.
Now, through some tiny examples, let's see how terms can be built incrementally
with the help of schematic variables and high-order unification.
Such terms can be proof objects, but they do not have to be.

###  Incremental term construction

The simplest possible example is to use the type formation rules,
available as `form_rls`, a list of theorems starting with those for $N$ and the $\Pi$-types.
In this way we can enumerate well-formed types by generating the corresponding proofs.

To begin, we enter a **schematic** goal. This allows the use of schematic variables
in the goal, presumably with the expectation that they will be replaced
during the course of the proof.
Isabelle displays these instantiations.

Our initial goal invites Isabelle to generate a well formed type in any possible way:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in1.png" alt="type formation example input" height="44px" />

The cursor is placed after the application of the typing rules, which have instantiated `?A`
with the type `N`:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out1.png" alt="type formation example output" height="70px" />

We have the option of asking Isabelle to backtrack over its most recent choice.
Prolog programmers will notice the similarity to responding to a Prolog output
with a semicolon:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in2.png" alt="type formation example input" height="66px" />

Backtracking has taken us to the next type formation in the list, which is for
$\Pi$-types. But now we are required to synthesise two additional types `?A4` and
the indexed family `?B4(x)`:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out2.png" alt="type formation example output" height="88px"/>

We continue by applying the same list of type formation rules again:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in3.png" alt="type formation example input" height="88px" />

The obvious choice for `?A4` is once again `N`. Note how type `?A` below is now
partially filled in:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out3.png" alt="type formation example output" height="66px" />

We unimaginatively continue with the same set of rules, to instantiate the last remaining type.

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in4.png" alt="type formation example input" height="110px" />

The family of types `?B4(x)` has been instantiated (yet again) with `N`.
It is a degenerate family with no dependence on `x`.

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out4.png" alt="type formation example output" height="70px" />

So the $\Pi$-type degenerates to a mere function type and is displayed as such,
thanks to some syntactic trickery in the implementation of CTT.
We could have continued to backtrack in order to generate
other well-formed types.

Explicit backtracking, such as is shown here, is provided so that people can
explore the proof space and sketch the design of backtracking-based proof automation.
However, it should never form part of a polished proof because the reader has no chance
of following what is going on.

### Type inference

Type inference means to deduce the type of a given expression.
It's not always well-defined: some expressions will not have any type, 
which implies they are meaningless.
On the other hand, $\lambda x.\,x$ can have any type of the form $A\to A$
where $A$ is a well-formed type.

Let us deduce the type of the ordered pair $\langle 0,1\rangle$.
It will suffice to use the introduction rules, which are bound to the name `intr_rls`.
We once again enter a schematic goal, with a schematic variable
where the expected type should go.
Proving the theorem will fill in this type.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-in.png" alt="type inference example input" height="132px" />

The first application of `intr_rls` will find the only possible match,
namely the introduction rule (called `SumI`) for a ∑-type.
The two subgoals demand type inference for the terms `0` and `succ(0)`.
The type of the second component is allowed to depend on the value of the first.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out1.png" alt="type inference example output" height="88px"/>

For each successive application of `intr_rls`, the cursor moves down. 
Let's look at the corresponding outputs.
After the second step, the term `0` has been given type `N` and the corresponding subgoal
has disappeared.
The type of the entire expression, given by the schematic variable `?A`,
has been updated accordingly.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out2.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

After the third step, because of the `succ` function, the type of the second component
is also seen to be `N`.
There is no dependence, and the degenerate ∑-type is now displayed as simply `N×N`.
Isabelle relies on syntactic trickery to achieve this.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out3.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

The fourth and final step solves the remaining subgoal. 
This is only possible because `0` also has type `N`; an ordered pair in this position
would have prevented this step and of course the corresponding term would be nonsensical.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out4.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

That was straightforward but the proof is too long, especially as it's so repetitious.
Even in 1986, I had figured out how to automate that sort of thing.



### Watching proof objects emerge


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

### Automation of rewriting and type-checking


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>




But I was deeply taken by and devoted perhaps a year of intensive work in order to produce that nobody noticed:


The problem was, for unification to be meaningful for Martin-Löf type theory, it had to take account of variable binding. Luckily, I had spent a couple of weeks with Huet at Inria. One day, he had taken me aside to explain higher-order unification.
I probably understood only 2% of what he said, but something must have stuck in my mind.
It was enough for me to locate and study [his paper on the topic](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(75)90011-0).
It became clear that higher-order unification would indeed do the trick.

Commit message:

Type inference of the addition function

_drafts/2022-11-30-CTT_in_Isabelle-II.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "Martin-Löf type theory in Isabelle, II"
usemathjax: true
tags: [Martin-Löf type theory, Isabelle, examples]
---

The [previous post]({% post_url 2022-11-23-CTT_in_Isabelle %})
describes the implementation of Martin-Löf type theory in Isabelle.
The ability to enter the rules in a notation as close as possible
to the original papers and use them immediately for proofs was one of my key objectives
for Isabelle in the 1980s.
Now, through some tiny examples, let's see how terms can be built incrementally
with the help of schematic variables and high-order unification.
Such terms can be proof objects, but they do not have to be.

###  Incremental term construction

The simplest possible example is to use the type formation rules,
available as `form_rls`, a list of theorems starting with those for $N$ and the $\Pi$-types.
In this way we can enumerate well-formed types by generating the corresponding proofs.

To begin, we enter a **schematic** goal. This allows the use of schematic variables
in the goal, presumably with the expectation that they will be replaced
during the course of the proof.
Isabelle displays these instantiations.

Our initial goal invites Isabelle to generate a well formed type in any possible way:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in1.png" alt="type formation example input" height="44px" />

The cursor is placed after the application of the typing rules, which have instantiated `?A`
with the type `N`:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out1.png" alt="type formation example output" height="70px" />

We have the option of asking Isabelle to backtrack over its most recent choice.
Prolog programmers will notice the similarity to responding to a Prolog output
with a semicolon:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in2.png" alt="type formation example input" height="66px" />

Backtracking has taken us to the next type formation in the list, which is for
$\Pi$-types. But now we are required to synthesise two additional types `?A4` and
the indexed family `?B4(x)`:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out2.png" alt="type formation example output" height="88px"/>

We continue by applying the same list of type formation rules again:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in3.png" alt="type formation example input" height="88px" />

The obvious choice for `?A4` is once again `N`. Note how type `?A` below is now
partially filled in:

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out3.png" alt="type formation example output" height="66px" />

We unimaginatively continue with the same set of rules, to instantiate the last remaining type.

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-in4.png" alt="type formation example input" height="110px" />

The family of types `?B4(x)` has been instantiated (yet again) with `N`.
It is a degenerate family with no dependence on `x`.

<img src="/images/CTT/typefm-out4.png" alt="type formation example output" height="70px" />

So the $\Pi$-type degenerates to a mere function type and is displayed as such,
thanks to some syntactic trickery in the implementation of CTT.
We could have continued to backtrack in order to generate
other well-formed types.

Explicit backtracking, such as is shown here, is provided so that people can
explore the proof space and sketch the design of backtracking-based proof automation.
However, it should never form part of a polished proof because the reader has no chance
of following what is going on.

### Type inference

Type inference means to deduce the type of a given expression.
It's not always well-defined: some expressions will not have any type, 
which implies they are meaningless.
On the other hand, $\lambda x.\,x$ can have any type of the form $A\to A$
where $A$ is a well-formed type.

Let us deduce the type of the ordered pair $\langle 0,1\rangle$.
It will suffice to use the introduction rules, which are bound to the name `intr_rls`.
We once again enter a schematic goal, with a schematic variable
where the expected type should go.
Proving the theorem will fill in this type.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-in.png" alt="type inference example input" height="132px" />

The first application of `intr_rls` will find the only possible match,
namely the introduction rule (called `SumI`) for a ∑-type.
The two subgoals demand type inference for the terms `0` and `succ(0)`.
The type of the second component is allowed to depend on the value of the first.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out1.png" alt="type inference example output" height="88px"/>

For each successive application of `intr_rls`, the cursor moves down. 
Let's look at the corresponding outputs.
After the second step, the term `0` has been given type `N` and the corresponding subgoal
has disappeared.
The type of the entire expression, given by the schematic variable `?A`,
has been updated accordingly.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out2.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

After the third step, because of the `succ` function, the type of the second component
is also seen to be `N`.
There is no dependence, and the degenerate ∑-type is now displayed as simply `N×N`.
Isabelle relies on syntactic trickery to achieve this.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out3.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

The fourth and final step solves the remaining subgoal. 
This is only possible because `0` also has type `N`; an ordered pair in this position
would have prevented this step and of course the corresponding term would be nonsensical.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-out4.png" alt="type inference example output" height="66px"/>

That was straightforward but the proof is too long, especially as it's so repetitious.
Even in 1986, I had figured out how to automate that sort of thing.
Here is the exact same proof, but this time declared as an ordinary lemma
(these don't allow schematic variables, so the type is filled in)
and with the proof done by repetition.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-lemma.png" alt="type inference example input" height="46px" />

### Type inference of the addition function

The following example is much more complicated. 
Addition of natural numbers is expressed using the eliminator for type `N`,
which is a higher order primitive recursion combinator.
Type inference here requires inferring the types of the zero and successor cases, which need to be the same, well-formed type.
The task requires many steps, but they are routine and can be performed by a mindless
repetition of the type formation, introduction and elimination rules.

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-add-in.png" alt="type inference for addition: input" height="66px" />

In this case, two Π-types are inferred (thanks to the use of λ), 
but has there is no actual dependence, they degenerate to a function type:

<img src="/images/CTT/typeinf-add-out.png" alt="type inference for addition:  output" height="66px"/>


### Watching proof objects emerge


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

### Automation of rewriting and type-checking


<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>

<pre class="source">
</pre>




But I was deeply taken by and devoted perhaps a year of intensive work in order to produce that nobody noticed:


The problem was, for unification to be meaningful for Martin-Löf type theory, it had to take account of variable binding. Luckily, I had spent a couple of weeks with Huet at Inria. One day, he had taken me aside to explain higher-order unification.
I probably understood only 2% of what he said, but something must have stuck in my mind.
It was enough for me to locate and study [his paper on the topic](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(75)90011-0).
It became clear that higher-order unification would indeed do the trick.
