---
layout: post
title:  "Wetzel's problem and the continuum hypothesis"
usemathjax: true 
tags: set theory, ZFC_in_HOL, ZFC
---

The [continuum hypothesis](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/continuum-hypothesis/) (CH) dates from the 19th century and became the first of David Hilbert's famous problems. Gödel proved it to be consistent with the axioms of set theory (ZFC), while Cohen exhibited models of ZFC in which CH failed. New axioms would be needed to settle the question. Despite decades of intensive research, the status of CH remains open.
Despite its reputation of being recondite and irrelevant to actual mathematics, ordinary-looking mathematical questions occasionally bump into CH.

### What is the continuum hypothesis anyway?

CH can be expressed by the mysterious formula $2^{\aleph_0}=\aleph_1$, and yet it is a simple question. A set is *countable* if its elements can be written in a series. The concept of countability was readily accepted by the mathematical community, who by assuming "facts" such as "a countable union of countable sets is countable" found themselves depending on the [axiom of choice](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/axiom-choice/) (AC) before it had even been promulgated.

Cantor had proved that the algebraic numbers were countable and that the real numbers were not, raising the question of whether some intermediate set $X$ of real numbers existed, itself uncountable but of smaller cardinality than $\mathbb{R}$.
And that concept could be expressed simply in terms of the existence (or not) of a bijection between $X$ and $\mathbb{R}$.
No need for cardinal numbers or AC. 

### The story of Wetzel's problem


$$
\begin{align*}
 D_\infty \cong [D_\infty\to D_\infty]
\end{align*}
$$


[mentioned earlier]({% post_url 2022-02-23-Hereditarily_Finite %}).

 [pointed out before]({% post_url 2022-03-16-Types_vs_Sets %})
 

<pre class="source">
</pre>



<pre class="source">
</pre>



<pre class="source">
</pre>



<pre class="source">
</pre>



<pre class="source">
</pre>



Filling all these gaps in the libraries seemed to involve more effort (and space in the [theory file](https://www.isa-afp.org/entries/Wetzels_Problem.html)) than the Wetzel problem itself. 

The project took 18 days and I hope to write more about it soon.
