---
layout: post
title:  Hao Wang on the formalisation of mathematics
tags: [general, Hao Wang, Kurt Gödel]
---
Since I have already devoted a blog post to a 
[wildly overrated philosopher]({% post_url 2023-04-12-Wittgenstein %})
who barely grasped the fundamentals of logic, it's time to pay tribute
to an underrated philosopher who wrote thoughtfully and presciently
on the formalisation of mathematics: 
[Hao Wang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hao_Wang_(academic)).
Wang must be seen primarily as a philosopher in the traditional sense,
who wrote essays and books, but he also wrote code.
He is the creator of the first truly powerful automatic theorem prover,
using what we now know as a [tableau method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_analytic_tableaux).
Indeed, most of today's technology for automated deduction has its origins
in the work of philosophers — we can add [Hilary Putnam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilary_Putnam), [J Alan Robinson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Alan_Robinson) – 
who decided to write more than just words.

### Wang on formalisation

Here is Wang, writing in 1955 (!):[^1]

[^1]: Hao Wang. On Formalization. *Mind* **64** (1955), 226–238

> We are led to believe that there is a fairly simple axiom system from which it is possible to derive almost all mathematical theorems and truths mechanically. This is at present merely a theoretical possibility, for no serious attempts seem to have been made to prove, for instance, all the theorems, of an elementary textbook of calculus. 

Of course, we are now well past that stage.

> Nevertheless, we seem to get a feeling of grandeur from the realization that a simple axiom system which we can quite easily memorize by heart embodies, in a sense, practically all the mathematical truths. It is not very hard to get to know the axiom system so well that people would say you understood the system. 

 He was doubtless thinking of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory. Modern type theories are possibly a little too difficult for most people to memorise.

> Unfortunately just to be able thus to understand the system neither gives you very deep insight into the nature of mathematics nor makes you a very good mathematician.

Very true. But we find ourselves asking again, how was he thinking about this back in 1955?
And his points are absolutely topical today. He considers what level of formality
is best for communication: an intuitive abstract, a more detailed exposition, et cetera,
leading ultimately to a formalisation in the style of Russell and Whitehead.
It's clear that the increasing precision is not always beneficial!
But he continues

> To put thoughts on physics into mathematical symbols is one way of formalization. Through accumulation and tradition this way of formalization has also become a powerful way of communication: for those who understand the language, a short formula may express more precisely thought which could only be explained by many pages of ordinary words, and much less satisfactorily.

The use of symbolism can be powerful and effective, but it needs to be done right.

Of course, he wrote much more. He described formalisation as a continuing process
dating back to Euclid, whose famous axiomatic system provided a common framework
for many schools of ancient Greek mathematics.
It continued with the 19th-century "arithmetisation of analysis":

> There is the long story of how Lagrange, Cauchy, Weierstrass, and others strove to formalize exactly the basic notions of limits, continuity, derivatives, etc., providing thereby rigorous (though not necessarily reliable) foundations for mathematical analysis.

And this continued into the 20th century with the origins of set theory, the paradoxes
and the promulgation of the seemingly consistent Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms.

Wang's paper continues with insightful and relatively informal observations on many aspects 
of formalisation and precision that are still relevant today.
He's written a more technical paper:[^2]
covering similar themes, but which goes on to sketch an actual axiomatic framework
specifically designed for formalisation.

[^2]: Hao Wang. The Formalization of Mathematics. *Journal of Symbolic Logic* **19** (1954), 241–266

It begins in his usual lively style:
 
 > Zest for both system and objectivity is the formal logician's original sin. He pays for it by constant frustrations and by living ofttimes the life of an intellectual outcaste. The task of squeezing a large body of stubborn facts into a more or less rigid system can be a painful one, especially since the facts of mathematics are among the most stubborn of all facts. Moreover, the more general and abstract we get, the farther removed we are from the raw mathematical experience. As intuition ceases to operate effectively, we fall into many unexpected traps.

I am again amazed at how he could see so far ahead, writing in the 1950s.


### Wang writing actual code




Kurt Gödel
