---
layout: post
title:  "Mizar: the first usable proof assistant for mathematics"
usemathjax: true 
tags: [memories, Mizar, AUTOMATH, Isar]
---
In two recent blogposts I have outlined the history of our field,
one on the [history of proof assistants]({% post_url 2025-12-05-History_of_Proof_Assistants %}) and another 
to tell people about earlier work on the 
[formalisation of mathematics by machine]({% post_url 2026-04-23-Why_not_Lean %}).
And yet, bizarrely, I overlooked one of the earliest 
and most influential proof assistants for mathematics: [Mizar](https://rdcu.be/fgsC9).
Here, to make amends, are a few words on Mizar and its influence on our field.

### Origins, or, utterly different from AUTOMATH

Mizar was created by Andrzej Trybulec of Białystok University, Poland and was designed 
from the start to accept a language close to ordinary mathematical writing.
As the project developed, team members eventually decided to create a 
library of contributions: 
the [Mizar Mathematical Library](https://mizar.uwb.edu.pl/library/).
The MML already held an impressive collection of formal mathematics 30 years ago.
With Europe divided by the Iron Curtain until 1989,
Mizar escaped the notice of Western researchers.
But after the launch of the
[QED Manifesto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QED_manifesto) in 1993, 
which proposed the goal of formalising all known mathematics by computer,
people suddenly noticed that 
Mizar and its MML had already made outstanding progress.

As I've described many times, [AUTOMATH](https://lawrencecpaulson.github.io/tag/AUTOMATH) 
arose in the 1960s,
based on the idea that the elements of mathematical reasoning 
(truth values and functions, hence typed sets and sequences, etc)
can be reduced to a simple extended λ-calculus. 
De Bruijn was not concerned about capturing the style of mathematical writing.
Instead, he set out to isolate the minimum core needed to express mathematics.
Mizar instead focused on capturing mathematical writing in all its
richness, aiming to be as natural as possible while being formal.

The differences between AUTOMATH and Mizar are striking.
Although different approaches to a problem often arise,
such extreme divergence is rare and likely due to the Cold War.
People younger than 50 may find it hard to grasp the realities of that time.
You could hitchhike from Amsterdam to Munich easily enough,
but Leipzig might as well have been on Mars and Białystok was 
practically at the Soviet border.
People who lived in the East could not easily travel to the West 
to exchange ideas at conferences.
We in the West could travel to the East, though with some difficulty, 
and the FBI or MI5 would probably open a file on you.
Hardly anyone made the effort; a notable exception was Tony Hoare.
So ideas developed in isolation.

We had some visitors from the Polish Academy of Sciences in the mid 1980s;
apparently they had been "invited" to leave due to their pro-Solidarity activism.
One of them, Stefan Sokolowski, devised a way 
to integrate unification and backtracking search into LCF; 
his ideas had a strong impact on Isabelle, 
where unification and backtracking are also built-in.
Another was Andrzej Tarlecki and yet another was Andrzej Blikle,
who in addition to his scientific work ran the famous bakery in Warsaw.
It was a privilege to meet them.

### Noteworthy features

One difficult aspect of mathematical language is that it has both sophisticated entities 
and numerous properties in combination. So you have groups, but also finite abelian groups.
There are latices, but also complete distributive latices
Moreover, some properties imply others, e.g. a cyclic group is necessarily abelian.
Mizar supports provides an elaborate system of [attributes](https://rdcu.be/fgthL) 
to manage such properties. I think that Mizar does this more naturally 
than any other proof assistant.

Mizar implements a strong version of set theory (Tarski-Grothendieck), 
making it equivalent in logical strength to Lean and Rocq.
But while the latter two implement the [calculus of inductive constructions](https://inria.hal.science/hal-01094195v1/document), 
a dependent-typed theory, Mizar builds a "soft" type system on its set theoretical foundation.
Some sort of typed language is definitely necessary for doing mathematics: 
you can't get very far if you have to worry about whether 5 happens to be a group.
Below the type system, you have classical first order logic.
There are no "proof tactics" but rather a built-in prover that justifies proof lines.
It is based on a notion of ["obvious inferences"](https://rdcu.be/fgtsk) 
that is designed to offer some automation but with a guarantee of termination.

### Impacts

The influence of Mizar is visible everywhere in today's proof assistant ecosystem.
Above all, people are starting to recognise the importance of a readable proof language.
Isabelle's Isar language follows Mizar in allowing declarative proofs with nested scopes.
This style is also available in Lean, and to a lesser extent in other systems, 
though it is too often not used.
Patrick Massot [has written](https://www.imo.universite-paris-saclay.fr/~patrick.massot/files/exposition/why_formalize.pdf) 
of the importance of having proofs that we can learn from.

The Mizar Mathematical Library attempted to demonstrate 
that significant mathematics could be formalised 
and that entries could be built upon one another.
The MML was recognised as an achievement 30 years ago, 
so other proof assistants have launched their own mathematical libraries,
such as Isabelle's AFP and Lean's mathlib.

Looking to the future, there is even a project 
to [emulate Mizar](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-018-9479-z)
within Isabelle. One can only wish them success!

### Postscript

Once again, I apologise for overlooking Mizar.
Unfortunately, Poles have got used to being overlooked.
Few in the West remember that they were the ones 
to finally capture Monte Cassino 
in the brutal Italian campaign of WWII,
or that they were the first to break into the Enigma cipher,
or even that Frédéric Chopin and Marie Curie were Polish.
Their country disappeared from the map between 1795 and 1918. 
In 1939 they were invaded and in 1945, 
after unimaginable death and destruction, 
they found themselves on the wrong side of the Iron Curtain.
(Although, according to one of our visitors, in 
"the happiest barracks in the Camp".)
But today, Poland is doing well, 
and Białystok in 2023 [hosted ITP](https://mizar.uwb.edu.pl/ITP2023/) 
(Interactive Theorem Proving) to celebrate Mizar's 50th anniversary


I think it was Stephan who told me that one day they had been issued some 
Soviet-built PDP-11 clones with unreliable memory. 
The PDP-11 was a lovely little machine, but underpowered for such work 
and 10 years out of date.
The achievements of Polish researchers under such conditions is truly remarkable.
